chore(docs): Migrating from v2 to v3 (#29747)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/reference/release-notes/migrating-from-v2-to-v3.md

### Update Gatsby version

You need to update your `package.json` to use the latest version of Gatsby.

```json:title=package.json
{
  "dependencies": {
    "gatsby": "^3.0.0"
  }
}
```

Or run

```shell
npm install gatsby@latest
```

### Update Gatsby related packages

Update your `package.json` to use the latest version of Gatsby related packages. You should upgrade any package name that starts with `gatsby-*`. Note, this only applies to plugins managed in the [gatsbyjs/gatsby](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby) repository. If you're using community plugins, they might not be upgraded yet. Many plugins won't need updating so they well might keep working (if not, please check their repository for the current status). You can run an npm script to see all outdated dependencies.

```shell
npm outdated
```

Compare the "Wanted" and "Latest" versions and update their versions accordingly. For example, if you have this oudated version:

```shell
> npm outdated

Package                  Current   Wanted  Latest  Location
gatsby-plugin-sharp      2.14.1    2.14.1  3.0.0   test
```

Install the new package with:

```shell
npm install gatsby-plugin-sharp@latest
```

> 

Reviewer: Despite the fact we default to npm is docs, I think it's worth including the yarn command here, as the workflow is completely different. The command is:
```shell
yarn upgrade-interactive --latest
```
...and then they need to select the gatsby packages to upgrade.

---
title: Migrating from v2 to v3
---

Looking for the v2 docs? [Find them here.](https://v2.gatsbyjs.com)

> This document is a work in progress. Have you run into something that's not covered here? [Add your changes to GitHub!](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/docs/docs/reference/release-notes/migrating-from-v2-to-v3.md)

## Introduction

> This is a reference for upgrading your site from Gatsby v2 to Gatsby v3. TODO

Reviewer 2: Yep. The v2 doc had more text and it might need some more introduction what they can expect and yadayada

> If you want to start fresh, run `npm init gatsby` or `yarn create gatsby` in your terminal.

## Why you should upgrade

This documentation page covers the _how_ of migrating from v2 to v3. If you're curious what's new, read the [v3.0 release notes](/docs/reference/release-notes/v3.0).

## What we'll cover

> short list of contents, point to sidebar at the right

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this was a consideration for folks reading on GitHub to have a list of like the h2 headings or so. But not mandatory imo

## Updating Your Dependencies

First, you need to update your dependencies.

> ### Update Gatsby version

Reviewer 2: But then I think our ToC of remark won't pick the headings up anymore (and you can't link to them with an anchor)

```diff:title=gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
- __experimentalThemes: ["gatsby-theme-blog"]
+ plugins: ["gatsby-theme-blog"]
}
```

### Removal of `pathContext`

The deprecated API `pathContext` was removed. You need to rename instances of it to `pageContext`. For example, if you passed information inside your `gatsby-node.js` and accessed it in your page:

```diff:title=src/templates/context.jsx
import React from "react"

- const ContextPage = ({ pathContext }) => (
+ const ContextPage = ({ pageContext }) => (
  <main>
    <h1>Hello from a page that uses the old pathContext</h1>
    <p>It was deprecated in favor of pageContext</p>
-   <p>{pathContext.foo}</p>
+   <p>{pageContext.foo}</p>
  </main>
)

export default ContextPage
```

### Removal of `boundActionCreators`

The deprecated API `boundActionCreators` was removed. Please rename its instances to `actions` to keep the same behavior. For example, in your `gatsby-node.js` file:

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createPages = (gatsbyArgs, pluginArgs) => {
- const { boundActionCreators } = gatsbyArgs
+ const { actions } = gatsbyArgs
}
```

### Removal of `deleteNodes`

> The deprecated API `deleteNodes` was removed. Please iterate over the `nodes` yourself and call `deleteNode`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The deprecated API `deleteNodes` was removed. Please iterate over the `nodes` instead and call `deleteNode`:
```

```diff
const nodes = ["an-array-of-nodes"]
- deleteNodes(nodes)
+ nodes.forEach(node => deleteNode(node))
```

### Removal of `fieldName` & `fieldValue` from `createNodeField`

The arguments `fieldName` and `fieldValue` were removed from the `createNodeField` API. Please use `name` and `value` instead.

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.onCreateNode = ({ node, actions }) => {
  const { createNodeField } = actions

  createNodeField({
    node,
-   fieldName: "slug",
-   fieldValue: "my-custom-slug",
+   name: "slug",
+   value: "my-custom-slug",
  })
}
```

### Removal of `hasNodeChanged` from public API surface

> The check whether a node has changed or not is already happening internally so it's not necessary to use this API in your plugins anymore.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This API is no longer necessary as there is an internal check for whether or not a node has changed.
```

### Removal of `sizes` & `resolutions` for image queries

> The `sizes` and `resolutions` queries were deprecated in v2 in favor of `fluid` and `fixed`.

Reviewer 3: Should we add a note here about the whole plugin being deprecated and we recommend migration?

Calling `deleteNode` with a string (the node id) was deprecated in Gatsby v2. Pass the full `node` to `deleteNode` now.

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.onCreateNode = ({ actions, node }) => {
  const { deleteNode } = actions

- deleteNode(node.id)
+ deleteNode(node)
}
```

### Removal of three `gatsby-browser` APIs

A couple of `gatsby-browser` APIs were removed. In the list below you can find the old APIs and their replacements:

- `getResourcesForPathnameSync` => `loadPageSync`
- `getResourcesForPathname` => `loadPage`
- `replaceComponentRenderer` => `wrapPageElement`

### Using a global `graphql` tag for queries

Until now your were able to use the `graphql` tag for queries without explicitly importing it from Gatsby. You now have to import it: `import { graphql } from 'gatsby'`

```diff:title=src/pages/index.js
import React from "react"
+ import { graphql } from "gatsby"

const Page = ({ data }) => (
  <div>Show my data: {JSON.stringify(data, null, 2)}</div>
)

export default Page

export const query = graphql`
  {
    site {
      siteMetadata {
        description
      }
    }
  }
`
```

### CSS Modules are imported as ESModules

> The web moves forward and so are we. ESModules allow us to better treeshake and generate smaller files. From now on you'll need to import cssModules as: `import { box } from './mystyles.module.css'`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The web moves forward and so do we. ESModules allow us to better treeshake and generate smaller files. From now on you'll need to import cssModules as: `import { box } from './mystyles.module.css'`
```

```diff:title=src/components/Box.js
import React from "react"
- import styles from './mystyles.module.css'
+ import { box } from './mystyles.module.css'

const Box = ({ children }) => (
-  <div className={styles.box}>{children}</div>
+  <div className={box}>{children}</div>
)

export default Box
```

### GraphQL: character escape sequences in `regex` filter

In v2 backslashes in `regex` filters of GraphQL queries had to be escaped
_twice_, so `/\w+/` needed to be written as `"/\\\\w+/"`.

In v3 you only need to escape once:

```diff:title=src/pages/index.js
const query = {
  allFile(
    filter: {
-      relativePath: { regex: "/\\\\.png/" }
+      relativePath: { regex: "/\\.png/" }
    }
  ) {
    nodes {
      relativePath
    }
  }
}
```

### GraphQL: `__typename` field is no longer added automatically

> In v2 we used to add implicit `__typename` field when querying for a field of abstract type (interface or union).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In v2 we used to add the `__typename` field implicitly when querying for a field of abstract type (interface or union).
```

In v3 `__typename` has to be added explicitly in your query:

```diff:title=src/pages/index.js
import React from "react"
import { graphql } from "gatsby"

const Page = ({ data }) => {
  if (data.foo.someUnion.__typename === `A`) {
    return data.foo.someUnion.a
  }
  if (data.foo.someUnion.__typename === `B`) {
    return data.foo.someUnion.b
  }
  return null
}

export default Page

export const query = graphql`
  {
    foo {
      someUnion {
+       __typename
        ... on A { a }
        ... on B { b }
      }
    }
  }
`
```

### Schema Customization: Add explicit `childOf` extension to types with disabled inference

Imagine you have node type `Foo` that has several child nodes of type `Bar` (so you expect field `Foo.childBar` to exist).
In Gatsby v2 this field was added automatically even if inference was disabled for type `Foo`.

> In Gatsby v3 you must declare paret-child relationship explicitly for this case:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Gatsby v3 you must declare a parent-child relationship explicitly for this case:
```

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createSchemaCustomization = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  createTypes(`
    type Foo implemenst Node @dontInfer {
       id: ID!
    }
-   type Bar implements Node {
+   type Bar implements Node @childOf(types: ["Foo"]) {
      id: ID!
    }
  `)
}
```

> To make upgrade easier, check the CLI output of your site on the latest v2 and follow suggestions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To make upgrading easier, check the CLI output of your site on the latest v2 and follow the suggestions
```

when you see a warning like this:

```shell
warning Deprecation warning: In Gatsby v3 fields `Foo.childBar` and `Foo.childrenBar`
will not be added automatically because type `Bar` does not explicitly list type `Foo`
in `childOf` extension.

Add the following type definition to fix this:

  type Bar implements Node @childOf(types: ["Foo"]) {
    id: ID!
  }

https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/actions/#createTypes
```

If you don't see any warnings - you are safe to upgrade to v3.

If this warning is displayed for a type defined by some plugin - open an issue in the plugin repo

> with suggestion to upgrade (and a link to this guide).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with a suggestion to upgrade (and a link to this guide).
```

You can still fix those warnings temporarily in your site's `gatsby-node.js` until it is fixed in the plugin.

Related docs:

- [childOf directive](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/reference/graphql-data-layer/schema-customization/#defining-child-relations)
- [Child/parent fields](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/schema-inference/#childparent-fields)
- [Schema generation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/schema-generation/#4-parent--children-relationships)

### Schema Customization: Extensions must be set explicitly

Starting with v3 whenever you define a field of complex type, you must also assign
the corresponding extension (or a custom resolver):

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createSchemaCustomization = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  createTypes(`
    type MyType {
-     date: Date
+     date: Date @dateformat
-     image: File
+     image: File @fileByRelativePath
-     authorByEmail: Author
+     authorByEmail: Author @link
    }
  `)
}
```

In Gatsby v2 we add those extensions for you automatically but display a deprecation warning.

> To make upgrade easier, check the CLI output of your site on the latest v2 and follow suggestions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To make upgrading easier, check the CLI output of your site on the latest v2 and follow suggestions
```

when you see a warning like this:

```shell
warning Deprecation warning: adding inferred extension `link` for field Foo.bar
In Gatsby v3, only fields with an explicit directive/extension will be resolved correctly.
Add the following type definition to fix this:

  type Foo implements Node {
    bar: [Bar] @link(by: "id", from: "bar___NODE")
  }

https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/actions/#createTypes
```

If this warning is displayed for a type defined by some plugin - open an issue in the plugin repo

> with suggestion to upgrade (and a link to this guide).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with a suggestion to upgrade (and a link to this guide).
```

-   type Foo implements Node @childOf(types: ["Bar"], many: true)
+   type Foo implements Node @childOf(types: ["Bar"])
    {
      id: ID!
    }
  `)
}
```

### Schema Customization: Consistent return for `nodeModel.runQuery`

For Gatsby v2, `nodeModel.runQuery` with `firstOnly: false` returns `null` when nothing is found.
In v3 it returns an empty array instead.

To upgrade, find all occurrences of `runQuery` (with `firstOnly: false` or not set) and make sure checks for emptiness
are correct:

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const resolvers = {
    Foo: {
      bars: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          const result = context.nodeModel.runQuery({
            query: {/* */},
            type: "Bar",
            firstOnly: false,
          })
-         if (result === null) {
+         if (result.length === 0) {
            throw new Error("Not found!")
          }
          return result
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

**Note:** when using argument `firstOnly: true` the returned value is `object` or `null`.
So do not confuse those two cases.

## Resolving Deprecations

> This section explains deprecations that were made for Gatsby v3. The old behaviors will be removed in v4. You can still use the old behaviors in v3 but we recommend updating to the new signatures.

Reviewer 3: This section confuses me. All of these are mentioned above as changes users should make. Is the point that the behaviors still work but are merely deprecated? It seems like they were deprecated in v2 and are now removed?

Reviewer 2: In v1 it was this behavior: `deleteNode(node.id)`
In v2 it was this behavior: `deleteNode({ node })`
Now in v3 it's: `deleteNode(node)`

So the breaking changes are the v2 deprecation, and the deprecations are the old v2 behavior.

Reviewer 3: Ah, it's nuanced enough that I missed it. Might it make sense to consolidate each of these with their previous sections? So that we mention the current behavior and then point out what will be deprecated in the future? Not sold on that approach, but figured I'd mention.

Reviewer 2: The thing is, if we mix breaking changes & deprecations, then it'll get even more confusing I think.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section explains deprecations that were made for Gatsby v3. These old behaviors will be removed in v4, at which point they will no longer work. For now, you can still use the old behaviors in v3, but we recommend updating to the new signatures to make future updates easier.
```

### `touchNode`

> For Gatsby v2 the `touchNode` API accepted `nodeId` as a named argument. This now has been deprecated in favor of passing the full `node` to the function.

Reviewer 3: Wasn't this removed as noted above? What part of this is deprecated and will eventually be removed?

---
title: Migrating from v2 to v3
---

Looking for the [v2 docs](https://v2.gatsbyjs.com)?

> This document is a work in progress. Have you run into something that's not covered here? [Add your changes to GitHub!](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/docs/docs/reference/release-notes/migrating-from-v2-to-v3.md)

## Introduction

This is a reference for upgrading your site from Gatsby v2 to Gatsby v3. Since the last major release was in September 2018, Gatsby v3 includes a couple of breaking changes. If you're curious what's new, head over to the [v3.0 release notes](/docs/reference/release-notes/v3.0).

> If you want to start fresh, run `npm init gatsby` or `yarn create gatsby` in your terminal.

## Table of Contents

- [Updating Your Dependencies](#updating-your-dependencies)
- [Handling Breaking Changes](#handling-breaking-changes)

> - [Resolving Deprecations](#resolving-deprecations)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Future Breaking Changes](#future-breaking-changes)
```

**Please note:** If your rely on a plugin that is not found within the [list of plugins within the Gatsby framework](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/packages), you very well may need to use the following resolutions in the near term.

The specific resolutions we recommend at this time are found below:

```json:title=package.json
{
  "resolutions": {
    "graphql": "^15.4.0",
    "graphql-compose": "^7.25.0",
    "webpack": "^5.24.2"
  }
}
```

## Handling Breaking Changes

This section explains breaking changes that were made for Gatsby v3. Most, if not all, of those changes had a deprecation message in v2. In order to successfully update you'll need to resolve these changes.

### Minimal Node.js version 12.13.0

We are dropping support for Node 10 as it is approaching maintenance EOL date (2021-04-30).
The new required version of Node is `12.13.0`. See the main changes in [Node 12 release notes](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/release/v12.0.0/).

Check [Node’s releases document](https://github.com/nodejs/Release#nodejs-release-working-group) for version statuses.

### Webpack upgraded from version 4 to version 5

> We tried our best to mitigate as much of the breaking change as we could. Some are sadly inevitable. In our breaking change section and deprecation section, you'll find the most common problems and how to solve them. We suggest looking at the [official webpack 5 blog post](https://webpack.js.org/blog/2020-10-10-webpack-5-release/) to get a comprehensive list of what changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We tried our best to mitigate as much of the breaking change as we could. Some are sadly inevitable. We suggest looking at the [official webpack 5 blog post](https://webpack.js.org/blog/2020-10-10-webpack-5-release/) to get a comprehensive list of what changed.
```

}
```

### Calling `deleteNode` with the node id

Calling `deleteNode` with a string (the node id) was deprecated in Gatsby v2. Pass the full `node` to `deleteNode` now.

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.onCreateNode = ({ actions, node }) => {
  const { deleteNode } = actions

- deleteNode(node.id)
+ deleteNode(node)
}
```

### Removal of three `gatsby-browser` APIs

A couple of `gatsby-browser` APIs were removed. In the list below you can find the old APIs and their replacements:

- `getResourcesForPathnameSync` => `loadPageSync`
- `getResourcesForPathname` => `loadPage`
- `replaceComponentRenderer` => `wrapPageElement`

### Using a global `graphql` tag for queries

Until now you were able to use the `graphql` tag for queries without explicitly importing it from Gatsby. You now have to import it: `import { graphql } from 'gatsby'`

```diff:title=src/pages/index.js
import React from "react"
+ import { graphql } from "gatsby"

const Page = ({ data }) => (
  <div>Show my data: {JSON.stringify(data, null, 2)}</div>
)

export default Page

export const query = graphql`
  {
    site {
      siteMetadata {
        description
      }
    }
  }
`
```

> ### CSS Modules are imported as ESModules
> 
> The web moves forward and so do we. ESModules allow us to better treeshake and generate smaller files. From now on you'll need to import cssModules as: `import { box } from './mystyles.module.css'`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### CSS Modules are imported as ES Modules

The web moves forward and so do we. ES Modules allow us to better treeshake and generate smaller files. From now on you'll need to import cssModules as: `import { box } from './mystyles.module.css'`
```

```diff:title=src/components/Box.js
import React from "react"
- import styles from './mystyles.module.css'
+ import { box } from './mystyles.module.css'

const Box = ({ children }) => (
-  <div className={styles.box}>{children}</div>
+  <div className={box}>{children}</div>
)

export default Box
```

### File assets (fonts, pdfs, ...) are imported as ESModules

> Assets are handled as ESM modules. Make sure to switch your require functions into imports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assets are handled as ES Modules. Make sure to switch your require functions into imports.
```

> ### File assets (fonts, pdfs, ...) are imported as ESModules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### File assets (fonts, pdfs, ...) are imported as ES Modules
```

  createTypes(`
-   type Foo implements Node @childOf(types: ["Bar"], many: true)
+   type Foo implements Node @childOf(types: ["Bar"])
    {
      id: ID!
    }
  `)
}
```

### Schema Customization: Consistent return for `nodeModel.runQuery`

For Gatsby v2, `nodeModel.runQuery` with `firstOnly: false` returns `null` when nothing is found.
In v3 it returns an empty array instead.

To upgrade, find all occurrences of `runQuery` (with `firstOnly: false` or not set) and make sure checks for emptiness
are correct:

```diff:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const resolvers = {
    Foo: {
      bars: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          const result = context.nodeModel.runQuery({
            query: {/* */},
            type: "Bar",
            firstOnly: false,
          })
-         if (result === null) {
+         if (result.length === 0) {
            throw new Error("Not found!")
          }
          return result
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

**Note:** When using argument `firstOnly: true` the returned value is `object` or `null`.
So do not confuse those two cases.

> ## Resolving Deprecations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Future Breaking Changes
```

```diff:title=gatsby-ssr.js
import * as React from "react"
-import * as fs from "fs"
-import * as path from "path"
+import stylesToInline from "!!raw-loader!/some-auto-generated.css"

export function onRenderBody({ setHeadComponents }) {
-  const stylesToInline = fs.readFileSync(path.join(process.cwd(), `some-auto-generated.css`))
  setHeadComponents(
    <style
      dangerouslySetInnerHTML={{
        __html: stylesToInline,
      }}
    />
  )
}
```

## For Plugin Maintainers

In most cases you won't have to do anything to be v3 compatible, but there are a few things you can do to be certain your plugin won't throw any warnings or errors.

### Setting the proper peer dependencies

`gatsby` should be included under `peerDependencies` of your plugin and it should specify the proper versions of support.

```diff:title=package.json
{
  "peerDependencies": {
-   "gatsby": "^2.32.0",
+   "gatsby": "^3.0.0",
  }
}
```

## Known Issues

This section is a work in progress and will be expanded when necessary. It's a list of known issues you might run into while upgrading Gatsby to v3 and how to solve them.

### `reach-router`

> We vendored [reach-router](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/reach-router) to make it work for React 17. We added a webpack alias so that you can continue using it as usual, however you might run into an error like this after upgrading:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We vendored [reach-router](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/reach-router) to make it work for React 17. We added a webpack alias so that you can continue using it as usual. However, you might run into an error like this after upgrading:
```

```shell
Generating development JavaScript bundle failed

Can't resolve '@gatsbyjs/reach-router/lib/utils' in '/c/Users/xxx/test/node_modules/gatsby-link'

If you're trying to use a package make sure that '@gatsbyjs/reach-router/lib/utils' is installed. If you're trying to use a local file make sure that the path
is correct.

File: node_modules/gatsby-link/index.js:24:13
```

> Make sure that you have updated all dependencies. It's also possible that you have an outdated `.cache` folder around. Run `gatsby clean` to remove the outdated cache.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To resolve the error above, make sure that you have updated all dependencies. It's also possible that you have an outdated `.cache` folder around. Run `gatsby clean` to remove the outdated cache.
```

> In some situations the webpack alias will be ignored, so you will need to add your own alias. The most common example is in Jest tests. For these you should add the following to your Jest config:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In some situations the webpack alias will be ignored, so you will need to add your own alias. The most common example is in Jest tests. For these, you should add the following to your Jest config:
```

This is because the plugin needs to set its `peerDependencies` to the new version of Gatsby (see section [for plugin maintainers](#for-plugin-maintainers)). While this might indicate that the plugin has incompatibilities, in most cases they should continue to work. Please look for already opened issues or PRs on the plugin's repository to see the status. If you don't see any, help the maintainers by opening an issue or PR yourself! :)

#### Handling dependencies for plugins that are not yet updated

> ℹ️ If you run into the scenarios listed below, you will need to leverage yarn resolutions until the plugin authors upgrade the plugins they maintain.

Author: Note that I persisted the emoji sign-posts that @pragmaticpat had in the draft. That said, I don't think we have any style guide nor conventions here.

Reviewer 2: I dropped it, as we don't use emojis this way
